
The man was looking inside for the strenght to save himself. He would have thought if he changed his strategy just this time this year maybe he'll be able to make himself get into the pull first. But that was the wrong thing to do because you'd always find someone stronger, wiser, more handsome than himself. And at the end of all his inward search for strenght all he found was 38 more weaknesses he didn't know he had; 38 more men who just had a little bit more than he did; 38 years of failure. God made the pool
From his previous failures he had become low of confidence, who wouldn't be? He had come not just to discover that he was weak and sick but it has been repeated to him for 38 years. In our society today a child's life can be ruined by a couple of words spoken to them when they are young. This man had 38 years of not just hearing how weak he was but finding out himself that he was always short of something. They'll tell you everyone has an Archilles hill but I bet you this man would say all about him was a weakness.
This weakness turned a man that came to the pool looking for healing to be looking for things that he thought would make up for what he doesn't have. Probably the 37th year the healed had just one more person to carry him to the pool. Today we are not sick, we aren't looking for someone to carry us into a pool but let me tell you we are all - most of us are - searching for something to make us complete. And we always look in the wrong direction.
So when Jesus met the man, the man had already created a role for Jesus to play in his life. Probably that morning he might have been thinking if I could get another young man to join my team and me spend sometime together when the angel comes we'd have built a winning team and I can get out of here. Not knowing who Jesus is and being blinded by the search to be stronger the man responded with the role he wanted Jesus to play. He told him how things would go if Jesus joins his team, he sold the vision to Jesus the same way Steve Jobs might have sold working at Apple to some genius he was looking to bring onboard. Today people say the man was foolish not have been able to know what he was looking for when Jesus asked him. But I think he had probably known that for 38 years and know he had given up on that story. How many times do we try to put God in a box or a role to play and not everything? How many times do we try to sell God a vision of where we want to be tomorrow?
But Jesus understood the predicaments of the man so instead of just healing his body he fixed everything about the man. He told him "get up, take your bedroll, start walking." Jesus didn't argue with him, he commanded him to do what is to be done. That command reversed everything. It started by telling the man 'I have a role for you to play not the other way round!' It also literally meant 'what you need to play the role I have for you is already in you. You already have it. Stop looking for the strenght to do anything more. Play that role.' And 'the role is to begin small: get up, then do the next: take your bed and then the hardest: start walking.' What a recipe for self-confidence. What a way to shift the focus from your weaknesses and how 'you' could fix yourself to how if you obeyed this man and eventhough it might seem impossible the command had given you the ability to atleast try something more.
And at the end of things Jesus said, "Behold, you are whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing befall you." That sealed not just his mental, emotional and physical health that had been out of place before. But it also fixed his spirit and soul. Now he can live the life Jesus has called all of us to live not by looking for and inward strenght and self-will but by looking at the God who thought him the basics of life.